docs: add TypeScript setup guide (#5863)
mochajs/mocha: docs/src/content/docs/explainers/typescript.mdx

---
title: TypeScript
description: Running Mocha tests written in TypeScript.
---

## Node.js Native Type Stripping

The simplest way to use TypeScript with Mocha is [Node.js native type stripping](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/typescript/run-natively), available in all Node.js versions supported by Mocha 12+.

> Use the [`--node-option`](/running/cli#--node-option-name--n-name) flag to enable type stripping, and [`--extension`](/running/cli#--extension-ext) to tell Mocha to look for `.ts` files:

Author: Ur right. updated the guide to lead with the no-flags-needed path for those versions. but mocha's engine range still includes `^20.19.0` and `22.12–22.17`, where the flag is still needed, so I kept that as a separate section for older versions.

worth noting: `--extension ts` is still needed regardless of Node version cuz mocha's default extensions are `js/cjs/mjs`. So "just write .ts and it works" isn't quite the full picture. you still need to tell Mocha to look for .ts files.
take a look at the pushed update and let me know if the structure works.

---
title: TypeScript
description: Running Mocha tests written in TypeScript.
---

## Node.js Native Type Stripping

Newer versions of Node.js can run TypeScript files directly via [native type stripping](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/typescript/run-natively). On modern versions of Node, type stripping is stable and enabled by default. For older versions of Node, `--experimental-strip-types` flag. This feature has not been backported to Node 20.

| State        | 20  | 22    | 24   |
| ------------ | --- | ----- | ---- |
| Experimental | n/a | 22.6  | 24.0 |

> | Stable       | n/a | 22.18 | 24.3 |

Reviewer: [Content]

* Grammar fix ("use the")
* The 20 note is better & more precisely explained in https://nodejs.org/learn/typescript/run-natively, so I think we can link there and save some space

```suggestion
Newer versions of Node.js can run TypeScript files directly via [native type stripping](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/typescript/run-natively). On modern versions of Node, type stripping is stable and enabled by default. For older versions of Node, use the [`--experimental-strip-types` flag](https://nodejs.org/learn/typescript/run-natively).
```

Reviewer 2: - +1 on the grammar fix of course
- I disagree RE "the 20 note." I've been frustrated with the Node docs around when flags are introduced or made stable (similar concerns with the `experimental-loader` flag). This table was gathered from a few different sources and ultimately testing on my local machine. Most of it isn't present in the link you provide. For example, in the link you provide, it's not clear whether this is supported in Node 20, nor is it clear when the flag was made stable in the Node 24 release stream. I'd like to keep the table here.

Reviewer: Makes sense, I'll rescind that part then 🙂 

```suggestion
Newer versions of Node.js can run TypeScript files directly via [native type stripping](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/typescript/run-natively). On modern versions of Node, type stripping is stable and enabled by default. For older versions of Node, use the [`--experimental-strip-types` flag](https://nodejs.org/learn/typescript/run-natively). This feature has not been backported to Node 20.

| State        | 20  | 22    | 24   |
| ------------ | --- | ----- | ---- |
| Experimental | n/a | 22.6  | 24.0 |
| Stable       | n/a | 22.18 | 24.3 |
```

Author: > * +1 on the grammar fix of course
> * I disagree RE "the 20 note." I've been frustrated with the Node docs around when flags are introduced or made stable (similar concerns with the `experimental-loader` flag). This table was gathered from a few different sources and ultimately testing on my local machine. Most of it isn't present in the link you provide. For example, in the link you provide, it's not clear whether this is supported in Node 20, nor is it clear when the flag was made stable in the Node 24 release stream. I'd like to keep the table here.

You just read from there, and test on your machine that has whatever version you have of Node and go from there but i would understand if you guys want a more explicit mentionings to keep things clear!

You also need [`--extension ts`](/running/cli#--extension-ext) so Mocha discovers `.ts` files when scanning directories (the default extensions are `.js`, `.cjs`, `.mjs`).

> Note that this does not perform type-checking, it simply strips types to allow you to easily run your tests. We recommend using another tool to get the benefits of type-checking.

Reviewer: [Phrasing] "Simply" implies something is _simple_: that the reader should know & understand it easily, if not already. Which is never the case in code stuff! Everything is new & scary to some folks.

```suggestion
Note that this does not perform type-checking, it only strips types to allow you to easily run your tests. We recommend using another tool to get the benefits of type-checking.
```

### Quick Start

> You can run Mocha against `ts` files matching your `spec` pattern with a single option:

Reviewer: [Phrasing] Precision: the "single option" reference means they have to scan forward to understand this line. Plus, some folks will skip the earlier text and only go to _Quick Start_, so it's good to give them the benefit of the link too:

```suggestion
You can run Mocha against `ts` files matching your `spec` pattern either by specifying [`--extension`](/running/cli/#--extension-ext):
```

```bash
mocha --extension ts
```

Or in a [configuration file](/running/configuring) such as `.mocharc.yml`:

```yaml
extension:
  - js
  - ts
spec: test/**/*.ts

> ```

Reviewer: [Content] As of #5049 -> #5397, I believe ESM config files are the new "best" way to configure Mocha. YAML is more and more out of favor:

```suggestion
Or in a [configuration file](/running/configuring) such as `mocha.config.js`:

```yaml
export default {
  extension: ['js', 'ts'],
  spec: 'test/**/*.ts'
};
```

(here and later)

### Older Node Versions (22.6 through 22.17)

Add `--node-option experimental-strip-types`:

```bash
mocha --node-option experimental-strip-types --extension ts
```

Or in `.mocharc.yml`:

```yaml
node-option:
  - strip-types
extension:
  - js
  - ts
spec: test/**/*.ts
```

:::note
Specifying `--extension` replaces the defaults.
Include both `js` and `ts` if you have a mix of JavaScript and TypeScript test files.
:::

### Hello World Example

The example below uses ESM `import` syntax. It is a minimal working example that does not include everything for IDE support. For IDE integration, see the [mocha-examples TypeScript package](https://github.com/mochajs/mocha-examples/tree/main/packages/typescript).

Given a source file `src/add.ts`:

```ts

> export function add(a: number, b: number): number {

Reviewer: [Style] Unnecessary type annotations are a common _"ugh"_ in TypeScript. Unless you've got a codebase big enough to justify [TS isolated declarations](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#isolatedDeclarations) there's no need for them.

```suggestion
export function add(a: number, b: number) {
```
